Review (#1)
jwoudenberg/blogpost-drag-and-drop: REVIEW_COPY.md

# Drag & Drop without Draggables & Dropzones

> Drag & drop UIs have been around for a while, and so you would be forgiven for thinking they're a solved problem. Certainly there's high quality libraries to help us build drag & drop UIs, and these days we even have an official HTML5 drag & drop API! Why then is building drag & drop UIs so hard?

Reviewer: The hook here could be rearranged to be stronger:

```suggestion
Why is building drag & drop UIs so hard? They've have been around for a while, so you would be forgiven for thinking they're a solved problem. Certainly there's high quality libraries to help us build drag & drop UIs, and these days we even have an official HTML5 drag & drop API! What's going on here?
```

> Having built some drag & drop UIs I've come to the conclusion a big part of the problem is our choice of tools. Those tools are the draggables and dropzones most libraries provide for building drag & drop interactions. Not using draggables and dropzones to build UIs often simplifies their construction massively.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this actually means. Are you saying the problem is the draggables and dropzones? The last sentence is where I lost the thread.

Also small edit to more directly answer the question you propose in the previous paragraph.

```suggestion
I've come to the conclusion a big part of the problem is our choice of tools: the draggables and dropzones most libraries provide for building drag & drop interactions. Not using draggables and dropzones to build UIs often simplifies their construction massively.
```

Author: > I'm not sure what this actually means. Are you saying the problem is the draggables and dropzones? The last sentence is where I lost the thread.

I see how I'm being unclear here, thank you for flagging it!

How about:

> I've come to the conclusion a big part of the problem is our choice of tools: the draggables and dropzones most libraries provide for building drag & drop interactions. Draggables and dropzones are often the wrong abstraction, and choosing different tools can simplify construction of our drag & drop UIs massively.

Reviewer: Yeah, lots clearer!

I think you could tighten it up further by removing " the draggables and dropzones most libraries provide for building drag & drop interactions"

> That's a pretty sweeping statement for a broad term like 'drag & drop', so I'd better back it up! To do so I'll show you three examples of drag & drop UIs built without draggables or dropzones. These examples come from real projects, but I've stripped them down to their drag & drop essentials for this post. I'll include what I believe to be the most relevant code snippets in those post, and invite you to look at [the full source code] if you'd like to learn more!

Reviewer: How would you feel about having less self-referential language here?

```suggestion
That's a pretty sweeping statement for a broad term like 'drag & drop', so let's look at three examples of drag & drop UIs built without draggables or dropzones. These examples come from real projects, but I've stripped them down to their drag & drop essentials for this post. I'll include what I believe to be the most relevant code snippets in those post, and invite you to look at [the full source code] if you'd like to learn more!
```

Before we start with those examples, lets start with a quick refresher on draggables and dropzones.

## A Refresher on Draggables & Dropzones

> To learn what draggables and dropzones are lets look at [Trello], an application where they are easy to identify. In Trello you can drag cards between lists. This makes cards draggables and lists dropzones.

Reviewer: 💭 be careful about saying something is "easy" or "obvious". The audience may have folks who are newer to programming, and to whom these things may not be so easy. I think you could just get rid of this part of the sentence, though, since you identify the draggables and dropzones immediately following.

> ![A screenshot of the Trello app, showing some lists and cards][trello.png]

Reviewer: this alt-text is not quite descriptive enough for the image here. What is happening in the image? What is the information you'd need to understand the figure without seeing it?

Author: What do you think of:

> A screenshot of the Trello app, showing a card being dragged from one list to another.

> On closer inspection though things aren't as clear cut. For example, when you drop a card next to a dropzone you might expect that card to return to its original list, or even get lost. But what happens is that the card will land in the list nearest to where we dropped it. That's much nicer for the user, but it's not clear how we might achieve it using draggables and dropzones.

Reviewer: might be good to say what in the nature of a drop zone precludes this behavior. It's just that you're not dropping the draggle *on* the dropzone, right?

Author: Yeah, that's it. I've struggled a bit to make that point clear. Took another stab at it and reorganized the section to read:

> A draggable is a UI element that follows the cursor when the user presses down on it. A dropzone is a UI element that gets an event when we release a draggable over it.
> 
> For an example lets look at the application [Trello]. In Trello you organize cards in lists. We could make the cards as draggables and the lists dropzones. That way we'd get an event every time a card gets dropped on a list, which we could use to update our app's state with the new location of the card.
> 
> ![A screenshot of the Trello app, showing a card being dragged from one list to another.][trello.png]
> 
> On closer inspection though things aren't as clear cut. For example, in the real Trello application you don't need to drop a card on top of a list. If you drop the card on some empty space it will land in the list nearest to where we dropped it. That's much nicer for the user, but it's not clear how we might achieve it using draggables and dropzones.

## Our first example, A Timeslot Selector

Our first example is a UI for selecting a time slot in a day. This UI represents a day as a horizontal bar, in which you can select a slot using drag & drop.

> ![Selecting a time slot by drag & drop][slider.gif]

Reviewer: more descriptive alt text again. Maybe something like:

> dragging to select a continuous region of time across the hours in a day

I'd like to start these examples by imagining what a draggables and dropzones implementation might look like. In this example it's unclear what our draggables and dropzones even are. We could make the time slider the draggable, because clicking anywhere in it should start the drag operation even if we don't drag the time slider itself. The screen as a whole might serve as a dropzone, because the user should be able to release the cursor anywhere to finish the drag. Already this approach feels pretty hacky, and we haven't even written any code yet!

> Lets start again from scratch without assuming draggables or dropzones this time and see where it takes us. We'll begin in a way we often begin an Elm application: by designing our Model. Our application needs to store a time slot which is nothing more than a start and end hour.

Reviewer 2: Consider changing this ...

> We'll begin in a way we often begin an Elm application: by designing our Model.

To this ...

> As we regularly do, we'll begin building our Elm application by designing a Model.

```elm
-- In this example a time slot always covers whole hours,
-- but we could make this minutes or seconds if we wanted.
type alias Model =
    { from : Hour, until : Hour }

type alias Hour =
    Int
```

> Now for the drag & drop behavior. In our example all you can do is drag left-to-right. This means that when the user presses down we store the hour the cursor is over as the left bound of the time slot. Then as the cursor moves to the right we will update the `until` time of the timeslot, until the user releases.

Reviewer: does this only work left-to-right or does it also work right-to-left?

Author: Only left-to-right. I'm on the fence about this one. Making the code support right-to-left dragging as well isn't a huge addition, but it is additional logic that distracts from the 'drag & drop plumbing' that I'm trying to focus on. In this version I gave precedent to the latter.

What do you feel is the best move here? I'd like to examples to be as light-weight as possible, but also realistic enough that they demonstrate the approach to drag & drop I'm championing here can be used in real world applications.

Reviewer: it seems like you're trying to demonstrate that

a) drag and drop is not always appropriate
b) beacons are sometimes more appropriate

so saying "in the beacons version it is easier to add additional behavior" and adding it seems fine.

Author: Makes sense! I updated the code so you can select in both directions.

> We will need to know which our the cursor is over. We can calculate this if we know the position of the cursor and the position and dimensions of the slider on the screen. Lets be optimistic and assume we just get that information. Our `Msg` type we design like this:

Reviewer 3: Just a tiny typo.

```suggestion
We will need to know which hour the cursor is over. We can calculate this if we know the position of the cursor and the position and dimensions of the slider on the screen. Lets be optimistic and assume we just get that information. Our `Msg` type we design like this:
```

```elm
type alias Msg =
    { event : DragEvent
    , cursor : Coords
    , sliderPosition : Rect
    }

type DragEvent
    = Start
      -- We don't need to do anything special on a Stop event, so we can treat
      -- it the same as a Move event.
    | MoveOrStop

type alias Coords =
    { x : Float, y : Float }

type alias Rect =
    { x : Float, y : Float, width : Float, height : Float }
```

> Now we can proof we are able to calculate the hour the cursor is over if we get `Msg`s that look like the above.

Reviewer 2: s/proof/prove/

```elm
cursorAtHour : Msg -> Hour
cursorAtHour { cursor, sliderPosition } =
    let
        dx =
            cursor.x - sliderPosition.x

        atMost =
            min

        atLeast =
            max
    in
    (24 * (dx / sliderPosition.width))
        |> floor
        -- Ensure we get a number between 0 and 23,
        -- even if the cursor moves to the left or right of the slider.
        |> atMost 23
        |> atLeast 0
```

All that's left to do is use this in our `update` function. When we get a `Start` event we update the `from` field in the model, and when we get a `MoveOrStop` event the `until` field.

```elm
update : Msg -> Model -> Model
update msg model =
    let
        hour =
            cursorAtHour msg
    in
    case msg.event of
        Start ->
            if coordsInRect msg.cursor msg.sliderPosition then
                { from = hour
                , until = hour + 1
                }

            else
                model

        MoveOrStop ->
            { model
                | until = 1 + max hour model.from
            }

coordsInRect : Coords -> Rect -> Bool
coordsInRect =
    Debug.todo "Implementation omitted for brevity."
```

> And we have an app! Well almost, we've not discussed where these `Msg`s will be coming from. There's a bit of JavaScript responsible for that, which I'll talk more about in a bit. If you want to peak ahead check out the [time slider source code].

Reviewer: little typo
```suggestion
And we have an app! Well almost, we've not discussed where these `Msg`s will be coming from. There's a bit of JavaScript responsible for that, which I'll talk more about in a bit. If you want to peek ahead check out the [time slider source code].
```

(p.s. there was a great Twitter account about this particular common typo: https://twitter.com/stealthmountain)

## Second example, a polygon editor

Our second example is a tool for editing polygons. We want users to be able to pick up a vertex of a polygon and move it somewhere else.

![Dragging a vertex of a polygon][polygon.gif]

You see those vertices? Those sure look like draggables! But these vertices are small and easy to miss, so we'd want our draggables to be bigger. We could achieve this by making the draggables invisible `div` elements centered on these vertices, but that gets us in trouble when the `div` elements are so close they overlap. At that point a click won't select the closest vertex but the top vertex.

We're going to leave those draggables in the toolbox and see how far we can get without them. As usual we start by defining a model to store the polygon we're editing.

```elm
type alias Model =
    { polygon : Polygon
    , draggedVertex : Maybe Id
    }

type alias Polygon =
    Array Coords

type alias Id =
    Int
```

> We're using array indices as id's for the vertices of the polygon. Not a great solution in general, but it makes a bunch of update logic super simple allowing us to focus on the drag & drop aspects of the problem!

Reviewer: would it make sense to say what you would prefer to do in real life instead? Just a couple words.

Author: Yeah, that would make sense. I took another approach: I changed the `Array` for a `Dict` which makes the existence of vertex id's explicit. I feel with that I can remove this paragraph entirely.

    }

type alias DraggedNode =
    -- For simplicity sake we're going to use the node's contents as an id.
    -- We get away with that here because we can ensure the nodes are unique:
    -- the user will not be able to edit them in this example.
    { node : String
    , cursorOnScreen : Coords
    , cursorOnDraggable : Coords
    }

type alias OutlineNode =
    Tree String

type Tree a
    = Tree
        { node : a
        , children : List (Tree a)
        }
```

Now we'll need to write behavior for the drag start, move, and end events.

The drag starts when the user pressed down on a node. We can put an `onClick` handler on each node to detect when this happens. We'll skip the implementation in this post, but it's part of the full [outline editor source code] if you're interested!

Then, as the user drags a node around we need to update that node's location in the outline. This part we're going to look at in detail.

Lastly the drag stop event. We already changed the outline while the user was moving the cursor, and so all that's left to do here is change the model to its non-dragging state by setting `draggedNode` to `Nothing`.

### Moving nodes in an outline

> Our hardest task is figuring out where to put our dragged node when the user moves the cursor. What might the user intent when dragging the cursor to a certain location? To move the dragged node in front of another node, behind it, or nested beneath it?

Reviewer 2: s/intent/intend/

> Using dropzones we could draw invisible boxes in those positions that activate when the user moves over them, but the experience is unlikely to be great. Make the boxes too small and the user will not spend a lot of time over them, making the interface unresponsive for most of the time. Make the boxes too big and they start to overlap, causing the upper box instead of the closest one that will receive the dragged node.

Reviewer 2: You wrote:
> Make the boxes too big and they start to overlap, causing the upper box instead of the closest one that will receive the dragged node.

I would suggest:
> Make the boxes too big and they start to overlap, causing the box in the uppermost layer to receive the dragged node even if it's not the closest.

This alleviates some of the confusion created by the multiple prepositional phrases at the end of your sentence.

Author: Great stuff, thank you!

```elm
type CandidatePosition
    = Before String
    | After String
    | PrependedIn String
    | AppendedIn String
```

We'll create a JSON encoder for this type so we can tag each beacon element with a data attribute containing its position in the outline. We'll then set up our JavaScript to find all elements with such a data attribute in the DOM and feed their coordinates back to us on each drag event. That will allow us to define a type for drag events containing the positions of our beacons on the screen.

```elm
type alias DragMsg =
    { cursor : Coords
    , beacons : List Beacon
    }

type alias Beacon =
    ( CandidatePosition, Rect )
```

Remember the `closestRect` function from the polygon example? It's what we need to find the `CandidatePosition` closest to the cursor! Once we know which candidate position is closest, all we need is a function to that moves a node to its new position in an outline:

```elm
moveNodeInOutline : String -> CandidatePosition -> List OutlineNode -> List OutlineNode

> moveNodeInOutline = Debug.todo "See full source code for implementation!"

Reviewer: if you're not going to show the source, I don't think you need a code block here. Tell folks to go look at the full source or include and annotate it.

## Necessary JavaScript

I promised I'd get back at the JavaScript required to make these examples work. All three examples use the same JavaScript code, because it turns out they have the same needs. In every example there's one or more Html elements on the page that we need to track the position and dimensions of as a drag interaction takes place. What our JavaScript code needs to do is generate events when the mouse gets pressed, moved, and released, and bundle with those events the positions of all elements we want to track. We identify those elements by giving them a data attribute with their 'beacon ID'.

There's tons of ways to write this code and I don't believe mine is particularly insightful, so I'll not reprint it here. The [draggable.js source code] for these examples is available though in case you're interested.

## Conclusion

> When we need to perform a complicated task, its natural to start by looking for a library to do the heavy lifting for us. Unfortunately I've not found this approach fruitful in building drag & drop interfaces. I believe this is because the draggables and dropzones that are central to the libraries I've tried were not a great fit for the experiences I tried to build, of which I gave three examples in this post.

Reviewer 2: If you were interested in adding additional content, I think it would be natural here to comment on the somewhat hidden cost of using libraries, namely working with the abstractions they've created. If those abstractions are a good fit to your domain, then no big deal, but if not then you wind up fighting those abstractions over & over.

Author: Yes! I'm a big believer off the statement: no abstraction is better than a bad abstraction. concept. I'd love to write more than that.

With draggables & dropzones in this post basically being a single example of that statement, I don't feel I've 'earned' the leap to this more abstract claim yet. I'd love to get back to this broader point after reading/writing one or two more blog posts illustrating the cost of bad abstractions, to have a couple of different examples to point to as supporting this claim.

> I've showed a different approach to building drag & drop UI's. This approach uses 'beacons', elements we mark because we'd like to know their position in the DOM for every drag event. I believe this approach allows us to create better drag & drop experiences with far fewer corner cases.

Reviewer 2: So, when I read this my immediate thought was "here is where you should announce the light-weight drag & drop library you're publishing" ... not for nothing :)

Reviewer: yeah, I kind of thought that too. Could you go into more details here maybe? Could be like:

1. here's the general pattern: make a beacon
   1. here's what a beacon is
   2. here's what a beacon is not (a draggable)
2. here's where this pattern is valuable
   1. here's why this pattern is better than a draggable
3. here's the takeaway: always/never/sometimes use this pattern

Author: Thank you both for your comments! I noodled a bit on this, and think I might have wrongly put the emphasis on the beacons here. Primarily this post is an encouragement to try building drag & drop UIs without a library. Beacons help you do that (as the examples hopefully demonstrate), but that's not the main message. I rewrote the conclusion, taking care to try cover the points you list Brian. Would love your thoughts on this:

> When we need to perform a complicated task it's natural to start by looking for a library to do the heavy lifting for us. For building drag & drop interactions libraries give us draggables and dropzones but they are often a bad fit for drag & drop UIs, of which we've seen three in this post.
> 
> I've showed a different approach to building drag & drop UIs. In this approach we subscribe to drag & drop events telling us what's happening in the DOM, update the state of our model based on those events, then update the screen to reflect the new state of the model. If this sounds familiar it's probably because we're describing nothing more than the Elm architecture. In that sense the take-away from this post is encouragement write custom drag & drop code. I hope the examples in this post show writing drag & drop logic does not need to be an arduous task, and one preferable over the fiddliness often incurred by draggables and dropzones.
> 
> To those trying to roll their own drag & drop I can recommend the use of 'beacon elements'. These are regular DOM elements marked so we can access their location on every drag event. Because beacon elements don't need to _do_ anything any element using any positioning strategy can be a beacon. This passive nature distinguishes beacons from draggables or dropzones, both of which include behavior.
> 
> Are drag & drop libraries always a bad idea? I don't think so. In particular there's libraries for specific drag & drop widgets such as re-arrangable lists. Using those when possible could save a lot of time. There's probably UIs where draggables and dropzones are precisely the right abstraction. Please send me a note if you ran into one of those, I'd love to learn about it! Drag & drop covers an incredibly broad range of functionality though, and so often an off-the-shelf solution will not be available. In those I'd put serious thought into whether draggables and dropzones are going to help build the UI or make it harder.

Reviewer: Like it overall! I think it'd be a more natural flow to reorder the paragraphs (currently 1, 2, 3, 4) as (1, 4, 3, 2).

Author: Oh wow, yeah, that's much better!
